right we know from these finnish studies
that saunas induce longevity four to
five saunas for 20 to 30 minutes a week
and we see a
four to five year lifespan increase in
finnish men and
i i forget the percentage but it's
staggering it's like a 40 to 60 percent
decrease in in alzheimer's and dementia
just from the sauna just from the sauna
now ben whenever i have somebody on the
show that knows a lot about health and
nutrition i always want to talk about
how can we at least make a real attempt
at living forever forever forever it is
interesting right because we live in in
a modern era in which people seem to be
pretty infatuated with anti-aging
technology or or supplements or you know
medications that you know the headlines
you know say they promised to extend
life at a nickel a pop but what's
interesting is that
people do not seem to be living much
longer yet
despite these efforts it looks like on
paper that we are but what's primarily
measured with life expectancy is how
long you're going to live from the time
that you're born until the time that you
die
and once you once you strip out the
variables that we have managed to get a
pretty good handle on
in our modern health era like like
reducing the amount of infant deaths and
early deaths and uh you know worldwide
epidemics you know and
measles mumps polio just just all these
things you know the bubonic plague
everything that would have wiped out
children and babies and then you begin
to look at the amount of time that we're
living after say social security age or
retirement you know kind of like that 65
to 67 is age we're not living that much
longer we really aren't i mean the the
past couple centuries have not produced
a significant increase in lifespan
once you once you reduce or you
eliminate that that children baby death
component
so
i think that if you look at a lot of
these cultures
where we find a high portion of
centenarians people who are living a
disproportionately long period of time
these so-called blue zones
that
the the lowest hanging fruit must start
there
right we know that there are certain
characteristics that when you look at
like a venn diagram of of okinawa and
loma linda and acaria and sardinia and
and uh you know all these different
there's a multitude of blue zones now
we see things that that overlap over and
over again no smoking
wild plant intake
legume intake which throws a lot of
westerners for a loop because we hear
you know plants are bad and there's a
whole paleo movement you don't eat beans
and you avoid a lot of these these
plants natural built-in defense
mechanisms but
we we know that legumes and wild plants
in general induce a xeno-hormetic effect
that causes the body to bounce back even
stronger so do you think then so
i've heard you talk about it and um
certainly something that's been on my
radar for a while but just for the
people that are listening so hormesis
being the something bad for you in small
amounts gives a positive effect even
though many of the things yes that could
that could kill you exercise will kill
you if you do too much of it or at least
you'll get over training syndrome and
you know you can you can generate some
adrenal issues and some hypothalamic
issues and and
you can do a number on yourself with
over exercises as many people who have
dug themselves into that hole no it's
horrible the same thing with cold and
cold thermogenesis right a
small cold shower every day is fantastic
for your nitric oxide and your fat
burning capacity and the the conversion
of adipose tissue into metabolically
active tissue and your your vagus nerve
tone but if you were to do and this this
is how they stress out rodents in
laboratory models of stress if you were
to to plunge yourself into cold water
for an hour a day you would
die a horrible early death or just feel
feel really miserable uh the same thing
we said for heat right we know from
these finished studies that that saunas
induce longevity you know four to five
saunas for 20 to 30 minutes a week and
we see a
four to five year lifespan increase in
finnish men and
uh i forget the percentage but it's
staggering it's like a forty to sixty
percent decrease
in in alzheimer's and dementia just from
the sauna just from the sauna now there
are confounding variables right like
i've i've sauntered at the finnish men's
sauna society and been in many of these
european countries in the sauna you are
i mean all sorts of things right you're
you're not drinking a lot of alcohol
you're not sitting in front of the tv in
a social situation you're de-stressing
there's a lot of confounding variables
that go above and beyond the heat
but it seems pretty apparent that small
amounts of heat are good for you and
large amounts of course you could stay
in the sauna for two hours a day and
wind up mineral depleted and dehydrated
and again
yeah so so that's the idea of hormesis
that things that that are bad for you in
very large doses are good for you in
small doses with uh probably calorie
restriction and fasting being one of the
most powerful and profound examples of
that if you don't eat you'll eventually
die or again just just have a miserable
existence and be libido-less and cold
and hungry but if you engage in certain
periods of caloric restriction or any
type of modified fast as a frequent part
of your life you you actually induce
that hormetic effect of fasting
so
we look at these blue zones and
and they're doing things like no smoking
wild plant intake legume intake a lot of
these hormesis things right the you know
iceland they have their babies sleep
outside in the cold and you know folks
are you know in switzerland you can you
can look at these swiss school children
going outside in the cold weather in
their underwear as a way to fight
against the flu
and then of course we see you know
moderate amounts of alcohol intake we
see
uh lots of time in social settings with
friends and emphasis on love life family
relationships i'm a bigger fan of before
you go after the i want to live forever
and have my head cryogenically frozen
and buy all the expensive injections and
supplements and creams and lotions and
you know do my my photobiomodulation and
my cryotherapy chambers to instead go
after
this low-hanging fruit you can get
outside barefoot or climb trees or climb
rocks or you know go out and do a
spartan race and roll around on the
ground but that's that's that's known as
grounding and earthing and of course
there are modern corollaries to that
there are modern biohacks that allow you
to concentrate that there are grounding
and earthing pads i sleep on a mat all
night that produces what is called a
pulsed electromagnetic field a pemf mat
and this this simulates exactly what i
get if i were to go outside in ground or
earth and it's useful if i've been
traveling and i don't think it kind of
matters i don't i've heard about
grounding but right it matters because
the earth emits a natural magnetic field
that is actually very therapeutic to the
human body but most of us aren't camping
outdoors or sleeping outdoors and in a
modern post-industrial era walking
outside barefoot so we can charge our
bodies
and enhance the health of our
mitochondria
by using the natural electrical
frequencies that the earth produces or
that we can produce through modern
technologies so so there are ways around
this
how else can you charge the body
good water and mineral intake right we
know that each of the cells is is in
basically like an aqueous solution that
needs minerals and needs water you can
put celtic sea salt and water there are
differences between himalayan sea salt
and celtics or celtic salt
based on
on the spectral analysis that have been
done by a variety of companies on salts
at the top of the totem pole from the
data that i've seen is the celtic salt
you know it's kind of like a grayish
salt you can find it at most grocery
stores that's about the best when it
comes to salt himalayan tends to be
higher in iron and other metals
for men especially who are concerned
about you know men tend to be at a
higher risk for what's called
hemochromatosis or iron overload i used
to tell people you know kind of like
kind of like i used to use the the term
fruits and vegetables as one single word
and then you realize well fruit apples
and pears are actually a very good way
to spike your blood sugar for a long
period of time
uh
i don't want to vilify fructose because
i think you know fruit is nature's
dessert it's fine in small amounts and i
love small dark rich berries that have a
low glycemic index but
i don't lump fruits and vegetables into
the same category like i used to and no
longer do i tell people oh have a good
salt like a himalayan salt or a celtic
salt no i actually i kind of think of
those differently now based on on the
effect that different salts have on the
body but the big picture is that i don't
think enough people based on soil
depletion based on on water being
stripped of minerals if you're if you're
paying attention to your health and
filtering your water and using reverse
osmosis or something like that you're
not getting a lot of minerals so there
are there are places you can purchase
trace liquid minerals you can buy celtic
salt you can buy
a very
they taste like seawater these solutions
called hypertonic solutions but you want
to stay very adequately hydrated and
have a lot of minerals and get outside
and charge the body with the earth and
finally you want to charge the body with
the other way that we can actually we
can actually affect our electrochemical
balance and that's near and far infrared
light which you can get from sunlight or
if you're if you're into whole you know
the whole modern biohacking and
technology movement there are there are
now
it's almost like like an infatuation
with this thing called
photobiomodulation you go to these
anti-aging clinics and they have these
red light tables that you lay on and you
can buy them for your home but you you
know there are infrared saunas right but
it's far infrared near infrared and red
light and when you combine
grounding or earthing or the use of of
pemf if you want a more advanced tactic
water good clean pure water high amount
of minerals and a lot of sun or again if
you're going to biohack it some type of
photobiomodulation panel or bed or sauna
you're well on your way to optimizing
mitochondrial health without a lot of
these fringe injections and tactics and
i would say that that's closer to kind
of
simulating what the blue zones might do
versus taking a deep dive into some of
the some of the more modern technologies
and supplements before you've taken care
of just the
basics that's really interesting and
something i'm going to play this back
because so much of that
i think is is
getting into mitochondrial health and
really thinking about that is something
that i want to be obsessive about just
from a
an energy uh perspective having the
energy to do the things that i want to
do absolutely and i'll tell you one
other very interesting thing that i
think confuses a lot of people when it
comes to the mitochondria and that's
this idea of antioxidants and the and
these are actually marketed and sold in
a lot of supplements including a lot of
you know so-called anti-aging or
longevity supplements right but the idea
with antioxidants is that i think a lot
of people take too many of them
not only has research shown that high
doses of vitamin c and vitamin e
actually blunt the mitochondrial
response to exercise when you exercise
you produce new satellite cells and you
get an increase in the production of
mitochondria mitochondrial density as
soon as you dump a bunch of antioxidants
into your body you're quelling the
body's natural hormetic response to
exercise you're actually shutting down
hormesis which is exactly what you were
going after by exercising in the first
place so by going out after an exercise
session and taking a bunch of
antioxidants or even taking a you know
doing doing a cold soak or a cold bath
you're quelling the body's natural
inflammatory response that you actually
want to occur now when it comes to the
mitochondria the same thing can be said
the mitochondria produce free radicals
and free radicals are bad right
well that's what we're led to believe
they're not free radicals are signaling
molecules free radicals are what are
released by your mitochondria to let all
the other mitochondria in that cell or
in that area of tissue know how much
energy to produce or not to produce you
need a certain amount of free radicals
to actually signal your body to know hey
i i need to shuttle more electrons
through the electron transport chain to
produce more atp
or i don't and when you completely quell
that free radical response you get
decreased mitochondrial activity
decreased cell to cell signaling and you
lose a lot of that hormetic response
that you're going after so the trick is
to find the sweet spot with antioxidants
preferably to get a lot of your
antioxidants from wild plant intake and
whole food intake so that similar to the
blue zones you're also getting that
hormetic effect of the wild plants and
then finally to be careful
pairing your antioxidant intake too
close to an exercise session so i'm a
huge fan of fasting after exercise not
only do you get a growth hormone
response and a testosterone response
that's greater than if you finish your
exercise session with the suck down you
know your your fructose your
multidextron your creatine you know
whatever else is in your shake
you instead fast for a couple hours
after exercise that also allows the body
to have to fight its own battle right
it's it's got to create a lot of its own
endogenous antioxidants it has to engage
in that free radical cell to cell
signaling has to create new mitochondria
or increase the health of the current
mitochondria it has to repair and
recover and as soon as you try to do
everything you can
all the bio hacks and supplements you
can so that you recover as fast as
possible you actually quell a lot of
that response so it's it's very
interesting how there's there's kind of
like a sweet spot with a lot of these
things especially when you when you
combine hormesis and mitochondria and
exercise and wanting to live a long time
so speaking of exercise what is the um
the sweet spot i guess for if if you're
trying for longevity a healthy lifespan
i'm guessing it isn't the ultra
endurance races yeah what does it look
like well
um
human beings are wired in a certain
sense to go out and slay dragons to
climb our own personal mount everest to
to get out and and just to move right
living in a modern post-industrial
largely sedentary era
we no longer are scratching that itch
with our jobs unless you're lucky enough
to be a construction worker
or a painter
or you know like my wife out there you
know bringing alfalfa to the goats in
the wheelbarrow and taking care of the
chickens and pulling weeds out in the
garden and just being out in the
sunshine lifting heavy rocks every once
in a while or maybe you know you're
you're you're a hunter gatherer
if you don't fall into any of those
categories
you get to the end of the work day or or
start the beginning of the work day and
you do have this ancestral itch to move
and hence we now live in an era
of crossfit boxes and pop-up gyms and
quick done-for-you 45-minute super
brutal exercise sessions to
replace what would have normally just
been our day-to-day job a hundred years
ago and you know
up until very recently gyms
and exercise and beating up and
buffeting the body that was the realm of
athletes and gymnasts and and warriors
and knights and gladiators and it wasn't
something the average person really even
felt the pressure to do you know you
want to survive you want to get through
the day you know you
you want to move and this idea of of
intentionally starving yourself for
fasting and also intentionally beating
up the body with exercise like this is a
relatively new phenomenon you know in an
area where we're sitting all day and
surrounded by food you know we've got to
figure out a way to kind of kind of
fight that battle right so we fast and
we exercise
but
the idea with exercise is of course we
don't see
to
return and kick this horse to death not
many of the blue zones or longevity hot
spots engaging in formal exercise
sessions right they are moving lifting
heavy things every once in a while
occasionally sprinting or playing game
of soccer or tennis or you know if you
look at it in in terms of like an
ancestral context maybe running from a
lion
but you know we're we're not doing a lot
of those things now and so we need to to
go to the gym now what research has
shown is that you know to respond more
directly to your question about how much
more than 60 minutes of intense exercise
let's you know let's say like a crossfit
intensity once you see about 60 minutes
of that which sounds ridiculous but i
know a lot of people who are who are
literally pushing themselves with two a
days or or exercising hard more than 60
minutes a day you see a law of
diminishing returns and an increased
risk of mortality and in the same way
with aerobic exercise let's say moderate
aerobic exercise right where you're
pretty aware that you're exercising it's
not like you're out picking weeds in
your garden once you exceed about 90
minutes of that you also see an
increased risk of mortality a decreased
rate of return on your exercise and we
see things like a cardiomegaly like an
enlarged left ventricle of the heart we
see increased risk for arterial
stiffness so it appears to be about 60
minutes of intense exercise and 90
minutes of aerobic exercise where you
definitely see a law of diminishing
returns
and so
what i recommend that people do
is a
you hack your environment so that you
are somehow trying to simulate
that
all day long low-level physical activity
type of scenario you get a standing
workstation you get a treadmill
workstation you litter your office or
your cubicle with things that allow you
to do short movement spurts throughout
the day such as a kettlebell to stop and
do some kettlebell swings
or
jumping jacks or you know i even have a
hex bar in my office with some plates on
it where i can lift heavy things every
once in a while when i take a break so i
work hard for 25 minutes take five
minutes move change positions walk swing
kettlebell do a few pull-ups lift the
hex bar a few times keep going
you know i wait to take all my phone
calls until the afternoon when i can go
outside in the sunshine and walk and
take my phone calls so you figure out a
way to get your body to be to engage in
low level physical activity during the
entire day the way i like to think of it
is that exercise should be an option
when you've finished your day not a
necessity then when you do exercise
exercise with the minimum effective dose
of exercise walking is one of my
favorite modes of exercise period
because i can i can talk on the phone
while i'm doing it i can be in the
sunshine very low barrier to entry i can
do it when i'm sleep deprived i can go
see a city when i'm in a city i can it
can be functional if i'm commuting
but walking speed particularly walking
at a slightly faster rate than what is
comfortable for you slightly faster than
your stroll rate and being kind of
cognizant of your walking speed as
you're walking like pushing yourself to
walk just a little bit faster than you
want to walk walking speed is correlated
with longevity as well and i'll throw
one other at you uh this particular mode
of exercise involves cold exposure it
involves hypoxia it involves some amount
of sensory deprivation you know swimming
just swimming just swimming interesting
that you call that sensory deprivation
you know this is one of the favorite
things i like to do in the mornings when
i travel is i'll get into a pool at the
hotel and i go under the water i hold my
breath i go under the water back and
forth when i need to come up for a
breath i come up for a breath and i
train myself how to control the heart
rate and it's even better if the pool is
a little bit cold right so you're
getting some of your cold therapy and
then as soon as i've recovered my breath
i go back under and it's peaceful and
you can't hear much other than the
little swish of your hands or the swish
of your feet your heart rate's up you're
training your breath you're a little bit
cold and you're sensory deprived so you
almost get a very kind of meditative
feeling from it so swimming swimming
would be the one that's a very good one
um earlier you were you've mentioned a
couple times like everybody has their
own personal mount everest what is yours
given the crazy [__] that you do like
what is your personal mount everest
well
for me it's no longer physical that's
interesting uh
because i i've been there and done that
and and
you know i've done the the you know all
the spartan races and i've done
13 ironman triathlons and the navy seal
training down in encinitas and the
the death race up in vermont and you
know you get to a certain point where
you know where that combination of
physical
activity and kind of the mind [__]
aspect that they throw in as well
whereas a lot of these events they don't
tell you what's coming next and they
want to beat you down and spit you out
you come out the other end a stronger
person
and it's made me incredibly resilient in
life
not many things feel hard to me anymore
i've learned how to develop my purpose
and my why you know very efficiently
which is what gets you through a lot of
these events
but i think that one of the main reasons
that i personally sought out and did so
many of those things is not only for the
reasons that i already elucidated which
is
that modern post-industrial itch that we
have to just get out and move and come
back with a battle scar and get down in
the mud and you know be outside and and
even compete against others in the in
the so-called field of battle
but it's also because we really don't
see
uh rights of passage or coming-of-age
ceremony
or a vision quest or anything like that
implemented with our youth these days
so for me growing up as a young man and
never having that time when i officially
became a man
i think that a big part of my drive was
actually wanting to to prove that i'd
become a man my my twin boys river and
taran when they're 13 they will go
through a rite of passage they're 10
right now so so they do a lot of
wilderness survival and you know i'm
training them to bow hunt and start
fires and plant forage and do everything
that would take to survive
on one's own in the wilderness then when
they're 13 they'll spend a week out in
by themselves by themselves together no
not together okay on their own when they
finish we'll have a you know like a a
cutting of the cord type of ceremony
they will most likely have their first
plant medicine experience where they're
we're all i'll expose them in a very
healthy way to to psilocybin or to
marijuana and i doubt that my kids are
going to come out of that experience and
feel like they need to go do an ironman
to to prove they're a man or something
like that so kind of a long answer i
didn't even answer your question yet
about what my own personal mount everest
is now
but for me i i would say
it's the first time i've been asked that
question
what is up my friend tom bill you here
and i have a big question to ask you how
would you rate your level of personal
discipline on a scale of one to ten if
your answer is anything less than a ten
i've got something cool for you and let
me tell you right now discipline by its
very nature means compelling yourself to
do difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off in fact i will tell you
you're never going to achieve anything
meaningful unless you develop discipline
right i've just released a class from
impact theory university called how to
build ironclad discipline that teaches
you the process of building yourself up
in this area so that you can push
yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work i will see you inside
this workshop from impact theory
university until then my friends be
legendary peace out
and the there
are things that i really enjoyed to do
when i was a little boy
that i don't feel i fully utilized in my
adult life things that skills that i
know i was born with i think everyone is
born with a unique skill set one of the
best ways to to know what your purpose
is what your passion is is to think
about what you enjoyed to do when you
were young
i loved to
to read and to write i like to collect
and disseminate information and to teach
right i do that now with my podcasts my
books and my blogs but i also absolutely
loved music
and i loved fantasy fiction when i was a
kid music and i played the violin and i
love to dance and sing and you know all
of my family members have been in bands
but for me it's finishing my first five
part fiction series by the time i'm 50
years old and also producing my first
album
particularly in in the the country folk
realm i didn't see that answer coming um
i want to go back to this vision quest
that you're doing with your kids i think
that is extraordinary have you read
joseph campbell
uh
i i'm very aware of the hero's journey i
haven't read his book when i read joseph
campbell probably in my early 20s and he
was talking lamenting that there were no
rites of passage that um he was saying
that basically one of the reasons that
he thinks the divorce rate is as high as
it is is when you go through even a
wedding ceremony has been really
stripped of any sort of real ritualistic
power
and after reading that i was like oh my
god like it really hit me hard and so i
said right when i get married i'm going
to be ritualistically scarred and my
ceremony because my wife is greek it was
this greek orthodox thing and it was
like all in a language that i didn't
understand and it was very formal and
there was waving of smoke and chanting
and all this stuff and i thought whoa
like it was so
intriguing it just really had my
attention so you couple that with then
the being
going through a very painful experience
that that left a permanent mark on my
body and i was like i'm a different
person the day after i got married than
i was the day before i got married but
it's really intriguing to me that you
said that even like the triathlons and
stuff if they could just ritualize it
right so
something something stark and profound
and memorable like that
could almost be
kind of kind of gimmicky or cheesy to
try to approximate you know with like a
triathlon or spartan or something of
those along those lines
but yeah i absolutely agree we're
missing that it's very interesting that
you bring that up with marriage i hadn't
heard it framed in that context before
but you're right if if marriage were
more liturgical or ritualistic we'd
probably see lower divorce rates and and
if if particularly and that this might
sound stereotypical or sexist to say but
particularly if i'm if a man's coming of
age remarked by something hard because
when you think about it a woman when
when she has her first period she kind
of does have that identifiable moment
when she has become a woman right that
that identifiable coming of age i don't
know that men go through something
similar in in terms of an actual
identifiable right of passage you know
if we were circumcised in this day and
age many cases it was when we were a
very small child or baby we don't
remember it at all so you can't really
depend upon that as being a market rite
of passage
but the other thing that i think about
is
is the fact that it could be okay and
this is just a thought experiment
to have multiple rites of passage as you
age to to to occasionally and i love
this idea it's really the only way i
stay fit is i always have something on
the calendar that scares me you know
from from a fitness or from a physical
standpoint like right now i'm supposed
to go up for a for a two week hunt for
grizzly and doll sheep and caribou in
the arctic circle and i plan on taking
no food with me that will be a bow hunt
i will rely upon fish and plant foraging
to get through that and that's not until
august of 2020 like it's going to be a
while before i go out and do that but
that means that during this upcoming
year 2019 i'll need to work on my arctic
survival skills i'll need to work on my
fire making skills i'll need to work on
on my on my hunting and my fishing on my
plant forge identification for that
region of the world like there's a lot
that goes into preparing for something
really [__] clear you're gonna bow
hunt a grizzly bear yes
yes i am not opposed to people going out
and occasionally doing hard things like
that i just think we need to strike a
balance you know and you know like you
know people feeling like they got to go
out do it you know an ironman triathlon
every month or something like that you
know i think that that's that's um this
little excessive so
um ultimately though
uh yeah i mean i think that that a rite
of passage is something that it's never
too late to identify and go through and
that it's it's something that a lot more
a lot more people should tap into
dude i want to talk more about your kids
the way that you raise your kids is
really fascinating to me so
um you were talking about how you really
don't have rules at home
and that you were like if my kids want
to try a bit of scotch i can try scotch
i educate them about what it's doing to
their liver
that i'll be on that sounds crazy yeah
why isn't that crazy well it's it's
there's actually there's a book and and
a series of learnings on this called
love and logic that's the style of
parenting that this is and i'm no expert
on on that book or that curriculum per
se but the general idea is that rather
than
than barking orders at your children or
your babies or telling them them no
don't do that taking things away from
them having a host of forbidden fruit
from pornography to alcohol to drugs to
the freaking hot stove that they're not
supposed to touch you instead
teach them the potential consequences of
any decision that they might make in
life
and then allow them to make that
decision with very few exceptions to
that rule if your child is about to step
out in front of a train i mean for god's
sake tell them no shout at them grab
them and then pull them back you know
don't don't let them die but at the same
time there are certain decisions that i
think a child should be far more
equipped to make young in life so that
as they get older they're able to
responsibly handle those decisions my
first experience with alcohol was when
my my father's friend bought him a
really nice bottle of scotch and in our
house the children did not drink alcohol
alcohol was forbidden if the adults did
have wine or beer or anything like that
which was seldom you know the youth were
not allowed to go near it and touch it
so my first experience with alcohol was
stealing that bottle of scotch from my
father's desk and taking him back to my
room and getting drunk so
i
think a far better approach is you know
at our house if we have some new fancy
bottle of wine that someone sent to open
it up and say oh smell this boys this
wine is fantastic you pour a little bit
of shot glass you swell it and you see
how that tastes in your mouth and and
you know they they can spit it out they
just well and my children hate the taste
of wine and beer and alcohol but they
have a very healthy relationship with it
uh the same could be said for
uh for smartphones right there is no
there's no smartphone rule in our house
there's no you can't be on the phone for
x period of time or here here's your
minute allotment to be on the phone no
my kids can take the phone or their own
they have an eye touch on a phone they
can be on that as much as they want but
they've been well educated about the
effect of wi-fi and bluetooth on on the
increasing
cell
neuronal division in their brain and the
effect that that can have on the sperm
cells if they like so many children and
adults do sit there with their phone and
in their lap you know they know i'm i'm
very very straightforward with my
children tell them you might you might
actually mess up your sperm and the
children that you have later in life
might be sick if you're holding your
cell phone with wi-fi on down by your
tiny growing gonads right and so i'm
very straightforward with them about
that and then they can go use the phone
whenever they want and they do go and
use the phone but when they use the
phone
they put it in airplane mode
they don't spend a lot of time on it
because it's not like this forbidden
thing that they you know they i got
dad's phone and it's time to use it as
much as i can until he rips out of my
hand
if it's night they they go up to the
room they get a little blue light
blocking glasses and they have these
little like
anti-radiation pads on their laptop and
anti-radiation cases and they always
like pull those out and have those in
their laps or use those and you know
they know about blue light and their
sleep and i don't tell them go put your
blue light blockers on but i make an
example and i put them on myself and i
tell them why i'm wearing those at night
when i'm looking at screens
and you know the same can be said for
gluten right it's not like oh don't eat
the cupcakes don't eat the bread when
you go to the birthday party you have to
skip the cake i tell them well gluten
will affect your brain it can affect
your performance in school the next day
it can do some harm to your gut and you
know and i i buy them these gluten
digesting enzymes that they can take as
a supplement and then i just let them go
out and make the decision a lot of times
they'll go to the birthday party and
they'll come back and say dad those
cupcakes looked really good i didn't
want to have too much gluten so i had
about half of the cupcake and it was
really good or we'll go to the the
restaurant with the wonderful
popovers that they love to eat with the
lavender butter and they'll get their
pop over and make their pop over and
then they'll pull out their gluten
guardian or their enzyme capsules you
know their
dipeptido peptidase that's the name of
the chemical that'll actually digest
gluten and so they'll take their gluten
enzymes and do that but there's no root
they can eat all the bread on the table
and they know that but it's a
combination of of
educating the children about the
consequences of the decisions that
they're going to make and then letting
them make the decisions and pairing that
with you being a very good example if
i'm not
wearing blue light blocking glasses when
i'm on screens at night and if i'm just
basically hoovering bread at the at the
restaurant and and
i'm uh you know i'm not exercising and
then telling them hey boys you got to go
learn to do the kettlebells if they
don't see me in the garage doing turkish
get-ups with the kettlebell the day
after i taught them how to do it and
told them it'd be really good for them
it really doesn't you know kids can see
right through that so
so it's it's two things it's the
consequences and then it's also being a
good example
yeah so
listeners of my podcast know that i am
um i'm intrigued by
microdosing but i've never done it but
i've recently come into possession of
some psilocybin uh that i'm
really interested in trying
and you said that at 13 that maybe the
time that your kids first have a plant
medicine i think those are the words you
used right um irresponsible
uh a responsible plant medicine
experience overseen in the proper set
and setting right and what do you hope
that they'll take away from that what
can i expect to take away from that
well
micro dosing is different than than
dosing dosing with plant medicine you
know the merging of the left and right
brain hemispheres your ability to set
aside pre-existing values and beliefs
and notions and make yourself open
and
embracing of new ideas new thought
patterns which allows you to make
business breakthroughs and personal
breakthroughs and leave emotional
baggage behind and develop better more
meaningful relationships with those
around you these are all things that you
would get from from dosing with these
things and more of what might be
considered a trip scenario and then
there's also the addiction component
people who are who are addicted to other
drugs such as you know whatever alcohol
heroin cocaine you name it
the use of psilocybin
or ibogaine is another very common one
has been successfully used to treat many
of these addictions but we're talking
about overseeing trip doses where you're
you're you're not useful in in any sense
usually you know flat out on your back
for hours and you know it's a very
different experience to something like a
micro dose but in the case of of a rite
of passage the reason to do something
like that would indeed be
after after a young man for example has
gone through something like that for
them to be able to dissolve the ego
you go i mean the best way i can
describe it when you use a medicine in
that way in a higher dose is that you go
completely blank slate and you just find
yourself on your back open to anything
that the world has to say to you at that
moment
i am a christian and i believe that that
god actually created a lot of these
plants to allow him to be able to speak
to us in a very deep and meaningful way
when the time comes problem is they're
used very hedonistically like a lot of
people are on their 38th ayahuasca trip
and i
but before we talk about microdosing i
should name
[Music]
that i am definitely a fan of a stoic
versus a hedonistic approach i think
anyone before they go out and do plant
medicine should go and and be in the
wilderness or go camping for for two
days or three days or five days and do
do a water fast out in the wilderness
without your cell phone and maybe a
journal and some kind of a spiritual
book and it's just you in nature i feel
a lot of people would quote find
themselves or get what they're looking
for as far as ego disillusion and a deep
spiritual experience if they were to go
that route stoically before they head
off to burning man with their friends to
do
dmt or ayahuasca whatever i think that
in many cases it's overdone but with the
proper set and setting
done done in the right scenario with the
right's intention
i think it can be very powerful again
for let's say in the case of a young man
dissolving the ego and allowing them to
venture forth into the next chapter of
their life as a new person having almost
kind of kind of pushed the reboot button
so to speak and started the next chapter
of life in a very profound and
meaningful way
now microdosing
we're talking about far less
but it's still a perceptible
difference that you experience in your
cognition and
your relationships and even things like
sensory perception in the case of
something like psilocybin microdosing
with psilocybin
what you get is not only that merging of
the left and right hemispheres of the
brain but a little bit of that ego
dissolving effect
and a little bit of a
sensory enhancement effect the veins on
leaves begin to stick out just a little
bit better flowers become brighter you
go outside and you feel the sunshine on
your skin a little bit more and plants
are brighter a lot of people like to do
things like use a microdose of
psilocybin and then before the day of
work begins go for a walk outside in the
sunshine to just kind of integrate
everything that you're feeling and then
you get back in and you just charge into
a day of work your relationships feel
better your interpersonal communication
improves
i find that you become more empathetic
to others feelings i use it for hunting
because you actually do get you know
it's i
i i i it almost has like this turn you
into the ultimate predator type of
effect where you can smell better you
can see farther you can see tracks
better you can you can see trees and
plants and leaves better so it's useful
in that type of scenario as well and
yeah it's a very very pleasant
experience when you use these type of
things in the right format and
responsibly
yeah that's um i i i haven't done it
historically because i'm a wuss i want
to be very clear about why i haven't
done it not like oh i have some fear of
not being in control i have a real
like
pervasive fear in my life of brain
damage and so
things that mess with the brain really
just freak me out but i've heard so many
people talk about i mean like you just
did that there's a potential really
amazing impact of it what is the
craziest thing that you've tried
there there's a there's a lot of crazy
stuff but i guess the one i've probably
caught the most flak for was um
last year men's health magazine had me
do like a three-month immersive
journalism story on everything a fella
could do to enhance his sexual
performance and testosterone so they had
me doing
gas station dick pills which essentially
turned out to be like a blend of
sildenafil and ephedra not any of the
ancient rare chinese herbs that they say
are in them uh
reduced ejaculation frequency where you
you have sex but you do like what's
called a power draw or you put your
fingers down by your perineum uh or or
kind of kind of do like
squeeze down there power draw would be
very similar to what's taught in the but
the the multi-orgasmic man where you
breathe energy from your from your
crotch your lower dantion up your spine
up to your head so you're drawing the
energy just as you're about to come
back up into your body like for real how
do you do that as you're learning how to
do that you're literally just breathing
and imagining the flow of energy coming
up the back of your spine over the top
of your head and back down and it sounds
strange but you can try this i mean if
you want to just try it on your own you
know you can you can masturbate and as
you're getting close you start to
breathe and draw it back up and you can
also take two fingers and put them on on
your perineum which is kind of the soft
area between your [__] and your balls
you just kind of put pressure there and
that can kind of keep you from
ejaculating and then you can practice
that and do it during sex it's called
reverse ejaculation it allows you to
orgasm without ejaculating but that was
one thing that they wanted me to
experiment with to see what happened
with testosterone
all that you know is as a married man
who who finds it difficult enough to
step away and and make the time for sex
and you'll find alone time with my wife
as it is
being able to have sex and then not
ejaculating mostly just leaves you kind
of irritable and full of energy and
laying awake in bed at night wanting to
go bench press or hit the gym but but
you can't so i didn't i didn't like that
too much but it was interesting there
there was a platelet-rich plasma
injections where they draw plasma from
your body and they concentrate the
growth factors and then re-inject them
in your genitals they had me do acoustic
sound wave therapy they had me do this
therapy that they use in men with
erectile dysfunction where they
literally take the equivalent of like a
like a jackhammer wand and they wave it
around your genitals and it makes this
like a shaking sound like you have your
dick sandwich in between two giant
speakers
and supposedly it breaks open old blood
vessels and builds new blood vessels and
and i had to put numbing cream on for
that one too of course
and uh and that protocol also seemed to
work as did the platelet-rich plasma
as did despite the sweaty palms and no
sleep the gas station dick pills like
like it all seemed to work to a certain
extent uh but the stem cells to answer
your question about one one of kind of
like the the craziest things i've done i
had the fat extracted from my back via
what is
essentially a liposuction procedure
which is a very common way to harvest
fat for stem cells and had it grown and
cultured using an enzymatic process to
isolate what are called the mscs the the
mesenchymal stem cells
uh a lot of people will do that and then
have those available as a systemic
injection for anti-aging literally
injecting the young you into the old you
which i did and i was able to subtract
17 years off my biological age based on
telomere measurements by doing just that
alone that's something you do like once
every five years or so whoa
so bank it as early as you can i'm
guessing no
you actually that's that is
a myth
that if you're 70 years old and you
can't bank your stem cells you're
screwed yeah now the stem cell theory of
aging is based on the fact that you tend
to lose your endogenous availability of
stem cells as you age but that doesn't
seem to accelerate aging and it appears
that when you inject stem cells what's
happening is the stem cells are calling
on your own stem cells your own growth
factors your own signaling molecules and
up regulating your body's own built-in
ability to be able to repair itself
which means that it doesn't matter how
old the stem cells are that you inject
because your body isn't using the stem
cells that you're injecting to do the
repair as much as it's using those to
amp up the communication availability of
the rest of the body so if you're 70
years old and you harvested your stem
cells and you had those injected you'd
still see a pretty good effect still see
a good effect measured in the length of
telomeres right well the length of
telomeres or joint health or anything
like that so
yeah
in the case of like a like a like a
genital injection uh same thing that
they're they're acting to call in the
body's own growth factors to that area
to bring new vascularization new
capillary delivery and so as as part of
that protocol what i did was i underwent
full body sedation i had the bone marrow
extracted from my hips along with my own
fat stem cells along with things called
exosomes along with this platelet-rich
plasma derived from my own blood and i
had my toes ankles knees hips penis
three times all up the spine face hair
everything done with stem cells at a
clinic in in salt lake city utah so it's
called a full body stem cell makeover
and
and of all the things i did for that
men's health article in terms of sexual
enhancement the one that i noticed the
most as far as
you know just making you feel like a 16
year old boy you wake up every morning
with morning wood and your libido is
high
and just everything works you know
perfectly was that stem cell protocol
but that was also the one that i i
caught the most flack for in terms of
you know the article and some follow-up
stories that you know some
some french magazine pulled the story
and and their their headline was manned
with small dick attempts to pick larger
and then i turned into a couple u.s
websites picked that up and so all of a
sudden you know man attempts to make
dick bigger with stem cells and then one
of the photos on on one of the websites
was me in my kitchen holding a needle
which was not stem cells it was like a
peptide injection or something like that
but they found the photo so now it looks
like i'm injecting my own dick with stem
cells i'm just a complete cowboy
so anyways though it was in a medical
setting i found it profoundly helpful
my wife was so impressed with things
like
the length of my orgasms improving
um firmness hardness everything she went
and she she did her her uh her clitoris
and vagina with stem cells so she did
the same protocol banked her stem cells
so she could do as i'm doing and do
repeat injections like every five years
for the anti-aging effect uh but
ultimately that
to answer your question that was
probably one of the crazier things i did
was the stem cells into the dick
that is amazing what other effects did
you notice if any recovery huge
significantly increased recovery post
workout meaning you know i have friends
who use testosterone who say it's almost
it's weird like you got to be careful
not to get injured because you just get
out of bed the next day and you're just
ready for the next workout i noticed
very similar effects with stem cells to
where your body just repairs itself
far more quickly after the workouts that
was one big one
my face a lot of people said that after
the after the micro needling procedure
they thought my face looked younger like
less less wrinkles um
you know so so there so there's appears
to be a pretty good effect on collagen
or skin or wrinkles
um the big one though was just repair
and recovery i've done a lot of [__] and
just just melting away a lot of the
aches and pains and joints that was what
i appreciated a lot
um you know i still get injured knock on
wood but it's uh
it it just it subsides a lot faster you
know
i clear things up from an inflammatory
standpoint a lot faster
well dude
doing all that experimentation uh from
the rest of us thank you it is i'm never
going to be the first time
penis is a vessel for science for the
good of men everywhere
[Laughter]
i don't i don't plan on doing that much
more i i think
uh
yeah i i don't want to be like the like
the dick guy especially i don't want to
be the small dick guy but i don't want
to i don't want to be known for for
crazy biohacks crazy sexual biohacks i
mean
honestly
going forward in life i think that there
are things that bring you a lot more
meaning
and happiness than than necessarily
trying to uh trying to grasp at
even even life and health at all costs
right and again coming full circle
to some of these blue zones
they're incredibly happy because they
have their ikigai
the the reason for getting out of bed in
the morning is the japanese terms the
reason for living right a purpose they
have a purpose i think everyone should
be able to very clearly and succinctly
name their purpose in life
just in a single sentence when you're
under stress when you know the bullets
are flying at you you need to be able to
say you know what my purpose in life is
to empower people to live a more
adventurous joyful and fulfilling life
that's really yours i ben greenfield
live to empower people to live a more
adventurous joyful and fulfilling life
and that gets me out of bed in the
morning surrounding yourself with with
positive relationships we prioritize
family dinner every night we gather
around we share our gratitude journals
and we play table topics and we laugh
and we go upstairs and i play the boys
you know
songs on the guitar and we we sing and
we when we read and we say a prayer we
go to bed and we're all together as a
family
knowing your neighbor's name and being
able to be there for your neighbor and
the people in your local community
there are all these things that
when we tend to myopically focus on
ourselves and
stem cell injections and peptides and
charms and mitochondria and all these
things they're good and i think it's
good like you like the reason that you
want to live longer or even live forever
is not so you can be the person who
who has the most car and makes the most
money and [__] the most and has the
most amazing adventurous life right the
reason that i think you should be trying
to live a long time and feel really good
doing it is so that you are as equipped
as you possibly can be to best fulfill
your purpose in life to best be able to
take the unique skill sets that you were
born with and if i can if i can help
people to go on adventures and and have
happiness and feel fulfilled until i'm
150 instead of until i'm 70 and if
especially after i'm 70 i'm not
relegated to a wheelchair but i'm doing
this and i'm up on stages when i'm 120
giving my talks and inspiring people
that's the reason that you want to live
a long time it's not just so you can so
you can you know sit at home watching
netflix and counting your gold bars
right so
so
i think that all this stuff needs to be
framed in that mindset and if that's the
reason that you're going out and doing
all this fringe [__] and biohacking and
spending all the money and reading all
the books as long as you have that in
the back of your mind that ultimately
it's all so that you can make this world
a better place and leave this world a
better place and there's going to be it
sounds it sounds like a horribly
pessimistic way to view things but
you want as many people crying at your
funeral as possible right if there's a
lot of people crying at your funeral
then then you've probably done a pretty
good job with that long life that you've
strived for and hopefully been given
that's a damn good answer man
before i ask my last question tell these
guys where they can find you online i
have a blog
i have a podcast where you can find all
my books and everything that's at
thengreenfieldfitness.com
uh and then i have a company called keon
where uh
it's it's my my playground to develop
supplements and you know i wrote a
gratitude journal that i have there and
all my my books are over there and
anytime i discover a cool new molecule
or herb or something i want to create a
supplement formulation over
over there i'd do it i've got coffee
and all sorts of stuff so i would say my
company keon or my website at
benggreenfieldfitness.com are two good
places i love that yeah all right my
last question what's one change that
people can make that would have the
biggest impact on their health oh okay
so we said we said going outside
barefoot
and uh
we said sunshine and water and minerals
i take a cold shower at the beginning of
the day and at the end of the day the
beginning of the day gets the nitric
oxide going
about two minutes yeah yeah i get bored
once i go past two minutes but i kind of
turn around i get the the underarms
where your vagus nerve travels and the
throat and the back of the neck and the
face it's very important to get that wet
so i do kind of a full body little cold
shower at the beginning of the day which
gives you nitric oxide and increases the
tone of your vagus nerve
increases cellular resilience it
deactivates the sympathetic nervous
system once you're able to breathe your
way through that stress and kind of
suppress the mammalian dive reflex right
that sharp intake of breath when you get
in the cold you want to train yourself
to just be like a monk you get in there
and man when you pair that with the
grounding and earthing sunlight water
and minerals and you just do those five
things and i i bet if we did that that
we would reduce the whatever it is that
the 900 plus
billion dollar pharmaceutical industry
we'd at least make a dent in that if
everybody started doing just those few
things
love that awesome and thank you so much
for being on the show thanks tom
you can fast without ever being hungry
and without ever suffering
and you'll have more energy